Add Gradle best practices (#4609)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/gradle-best-practices.md

> [//]: # (title: Gradle best practices)
> 

Reviewer: If a newbie cold lands on this page it'd be nice to give them a brief sentence to help them understand what this Gradle thing is.

E.g. something like this:

```suggestion
[//]: # (title: Gradle best practices)

[Gradle](https://gradle.org/) is a tool used by many Kotlin projects to build the projects.
```

(Also, add a clickable link to the Gradle homepage if they want to deep dive.)

Getting the best out of Gradle is essential to help you spend less time managing and waiting for builds, and more time 
coding. Here we provide a set of best practices split into two key areas: **organizing** and **optimizing** your projects.

## Organize

This section focuses on structuring your Gradle projects to improve clarity, maintainability, and scalability.

### Use a version catalog

Use a version catalog in a `libs.versions.toml` file to centralize dependency management, enabling you to define and 
reuse versions, libraries, and plugins consistently across projects.

```none
[versions]
kotlinxCoroutines = "%coroutinesVersion%"

[libraries]
kotlinxCoroutines = { module = "org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core", version.ref = "kotlinxCoroutines" }
```

With the following dependency added to your `build.gradle.kts` file:

> ```none

Reviewer: Is it possible to highlight the code blocks as Kotlin?

````suggestion
```kotlin
````

dependencies {
    implementation(libs.kotlinxCoroutines)
}
```

Learn more in Gradle's documentation about [Dependency management basics](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/dependency_management_basics.html#version_catalog).

### Use Kotlin DSL

Use Kotlin DSL instead of the traditional Groovy DSL. You avoid learning another language and gain the benefits of strict
typing. Strict typing lets IDEs provide better support for refactoring and auto-completion, making development more efficient.

Find more information in [Gradle’s Kotlin DSL primer](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/kotlin_dsl.html).

Read Gradle's [blog](https://blog.gradle.org/kotlin-dsl-is-now-the-default-for-new-gradle-builds) about Kotlin DSL becoming
the default for Gradle builds.

### Use convention plugins

<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

Use convention plugins to encapsulate and reuse common build logic across multiple build files. Moving shared configurations
into a plugin helps simplify and modularize your build scripts.

Although the initial setup may be time-consuming, you will find it easy to maintain and add new build logic once you complete it.

> Learn more in Gradle's documentation about [Convention plugins](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/custom_plugins.html#sec:convention_plugins).

Reviewer: It looks like only the first paragraph is highlighted as 'advanced', but should all these three paragraphs be highlighted?

<img width="730" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/76757d77-b42f-4de5-986a-b7932c8b726e" />

Author: That's the style of labels in writerside: https://www.jetbrains.com/help/writerside/topic-and-chapter-labels.html#insert-labels The only alternative atm is to add the label per paragraph but that would look awful.

If you're actively developing and testing a specific platform, run the corresponding `linkDebug*` task instead.

For more information, see [Tips for improving compilation time](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/native-improving-compilation-time.md#gradle-configuration).

### Migrate from kapt to KSP

If you're using a library that relies on the [kapt](kapt.md) compiler plugin, check whether you can switch to using the [Kotlin Symbol Processing (KSP) API](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/ksp-overview.html)
instead. The KSP API improves build performance by reducing annotation processing time. KSP is faster and more efficient
than kapt, as it processes source code directly without generating intermediary Java stubs.

To learn more about how KSP compares to kapt, check out [why KSP](ksp-why-ksp.md).

### Use modularization

<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

> Modularization only benefits projects of moderate to large size. It doesn't provide advantages for projects based
> on a microservices architecture.
>
{style="note"}

Use a modularized project structure to accelerate build speed and enable easier parallel development. Structure your

> project into one root project and one or more subprojects. If there are changes in only one of the subprojects, Gradle
> rebuilds only that specific subproject.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project into one root project and one or more subprojects. If changes only affect one of the subprojects, Gradle
rebuilds only that specific subproject.
```

Minor rewording, because if `app subproject` depends on `lib subproject`, any changes in `lib subproject` will cause a rebuild of `app subproject`.

```none
.
└── root-project/
    ├── settings.gradle.kts
    ├── app subproject/
    │   └── build.gradle.kts
    └── lib subproject/
        └── build.gradle.kts
```

Learn more in Gradle's documentation about [Structuring projects with Gradle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/multi_project_builds.html).

### Set up CI/CD
<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

Set up a CI/CD process to significantly reduce build time by using incremental builds and caching dependencies. You can
do this by setting up persistent storage or using a remote build cache. This process doesn't have to be time-consuming, 

> as some providers, like GitHub, offer this service almost out of the box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as some providers, like [GitHub](https://github.com/features/actions), offer this service almost out of the box.
```

Suggestion: what about adding a link to GHA?

[//]: # (title: Gradle best practices)

[Gradle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/userguide.html) is a build system used by many Kotlin projects to automate
and manage the build process.

Getting the best out of Gradle is essential to help you spend less time managing and waiting for builds, and more time 
coding. Here we provide a set of best practices split into two key areas: **organizing** and **optimizing** your projects.

## Organize

This section focuses on structuring your Gradle projects to improve clarity, maintainability, and scalability.

### Use a version catalog

> Use a version catalog in a `libs.versions.toml` file to centralize dependency management, enabling you to define and 

Reviewer 2: I meant: "It enables...".
I guess it sounds better?

> Use a version catalog in a `libs.versions.toml` file to centralize dependency management, enabling you to define and 

Author: Good point! I went with "This enables..."

```

With the following dependency added to your `build.gradle.kts` file:

```kotlin
dependencies {
    implementation(libs.kotlinxCoroutines)
}
```

Learn more in Gradle's documentation about [Dependency management basics](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/dependency_management_basics.html#version_catalog).

### Use Kotlin DSL

Use Kotlin DSL instead of the traditional Groovy DSL. You avoid learning another language and gain the benefits of strict
typing. Strict typing lets IDEs provide better support for refactoring and auto-completion, making development more efficient.

Find more information in [Gradle’s Kotlin DSL primer](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/kotlin_dsl.html).

Read Gradle's [blog](https://blog.gradle.org/kotlin-dsl-is-now-the-default-for-new-gradle-builds) about Kotlin DSL becoming
the default for Gradle builds.

### Use convention plugins

<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

Use convention plugins to encapsulate and reuse common build logic across multiple build files. Moving shared configurations
into a plugin helps simplify and modularize your build scripts.

> Although the initial setup may be time-consuming, you will find it easy to maintain and add new build logic once you complete it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although the initial setup may be time-consuming, it is easy to maintain and add new build logic once you complete it.
```

Reviewer 2: WDYT? 
Or it doesn't sound natural?

instead. The KSP API improves build performance by reducing annotation processing time. KSP is faster and more efficient
than kapt, as it processes source code directly without generating intermediary Java stubs.

To learn more about how KSP compares to kapt, check out [why KSP](ksp-why-ksp.md).

### Use modularization

<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

> Modularization only benefits projects of moderate to large size. It doesn't provide advantages for projects based
> on a microservices architecture.
>
{style="note"}

Use a modularized project structure to accelerate build speed and enable easier parallel development. Structure your
project into one root project and one or more subprojects. If changes only affect one of the subprojects, Gradle
rebuilds only that specific subproject.

```none
.
└── root-project/
    ├── settings.gradle.kts
    ├── app subproject/
    │   └── build.gradle.kts
    └── lib subproject/
        └── build.gradle.kts
```

Learn more in Gradle's documentation about [Structuring projects with Gradle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/multi_project_builds.html).

### Set up CI/CD
<primary-label ref="advanced"/>

> Set up a CI/CD process to significantly reduce build time by using incremental builds and caching dependencies. You can

Reviewer 2: Don't like doubling "Set up". 
I guess it's better to leave it as is.

> Set up a CI/CD process to significantly reduce build time by using incremental builds and caching dependencies. You can

Author: Or?
"Set up a CI/CD process to significantly reduce build time by using incremental builds and caching dependencies. **_Add_** persistent storage or use a remote build cache to see these benefits.""
